Kubernetes QoS (Quality of Service) classes determine which Pods are evicted first when a node is under resource pressure (most commonly memory pressure, but also disk/ephemeral-storage pressure). QoS is computed per Pod from the requests/limits across all its containers.
QoS classes (how they’re assigned)

1) Guaranteed (most protected)
A Pod is Guaranteed if every container has both CPU and memory requests and limits, and for each container request == limit (for CPU and for memory).
resources:
  requests: { cpu: "500m", memory: "512Mi" }
  limits:   { cpu: "500m", memory: "512Mi" }

2) Burstable (middle)
A Pod is Burstable if it has some requests/limits set, but it does not meet Guaranteed (e.g., request != limit, or only memory set, etc.).
resources:
  requests: { cpu: "250m", memory: "512Mi" }
  limits:   { cpu: "2",    memory: "2Gi" }

3) BestEffort (least protected)
A Pod is BestEffort if no container in the Pod sets any CPU/memory requests or limits.
resources: {}

Eviction behavior (what happens under pressure)
Kubernetes’ kubelet eviction manager evicts Pods to protect the node. The general eviction preference is:
BestEffort → Burstable → Guaranteed (evict left side first).
Example: Memory pressure eviction on a node
Imagine a node is running these Pods:

Pod A (BestEffort): no requests/limits, currently using 800Mi
Pod B (Burstable): request 512Mi, using 1.5Gi
Pod C (Guaranteed): 512Mi request/limit, using 512Mi

If the node hits a memory eviction threshold:

Pod A is the first eviction candidate (BestEffort).
If still pressured, Pod B is next (Burstable)—and within Burstable, Pods that are using more relative to their requests tend to be stronger candidates.
Pod C (Guaranteed) is evicted last, unless pressure is severe enough that the node can’t recover otherwise.

Important nuance: eviction vs OOMKill

Eviction is kubelet proactively terminating Pods to relieve pressure; it records an eviction reason (e.g., Evicted).
OOMKill happens when a container exceeds its memory limit (or the node kernel runs out of memory). QoS influences who gets killed first at the node level, but a container that exceeds its own limit can be OOMKilled regardless of QoS.

Disk / ephemeral-storage pressure (often overlooked)
QoS also matters for ephemeral-storage pressure if you set ephemeral-storage requests/limits. If you don’t, many workloads behave like “unbounded” from a disk perspective, increasing the chance of evictions when /var/lib/kubelet or imagefs fills up.
Architect-level implications (how to use this)

For critical services, aim for Guaranteed where feasible (especially for memory) to reduce eviction risk.
Use Burstable intentionally for workloads that can tolerate disruption (workers, non-critical APIs) while still giving the scheduler solid signals via requests.
Avoid BestEffort in shared production clusters; it’s the first to go during incidents.
QoS is only one axis: PodPriority, PDBs, and replica counts strongly affect real-world disruption (e.g., a high-priority Burstable pod may outlive a low-priority Guaranteed pod depending on policy/config).


          Eviction and OOMKilled are both “pod died due to resources,” but they originate from different controllers and look different operationally.



Aspect
Eviction (Evicted)
OOMKilled (OOMKilled)




Trigger
Node-level pressure (memory, ephemeral-storage, PID, disk)
Container exceeds its memory limit (or node kernel OOM)


Who initiates
kubelet eviction manager (proactive)
Linux kernel OOM killer (reactive)


Gracefulness
Usually SIGTERM + grace period (PreStop can run)
Typically SIGKILL (no cleanup; abrupt)


Scope
Chooses pods to remove to protect node
Kills a process/container causing OOM


Selection
QoS + Priority influence who goes first (BestEffort → Burstable → Guaranteed)
If it’s a cgroup limit OOM, it kills within that container’s cgroup regardless of QoS


What you’ll see
Pod status Failed, reason Evicted, message like “node had condition: [MemoryPressure]”
Container last state reason OOMKilled, exit code often 137, restartCount increments


PDB effect
This is involuntary disruption; PDBs are not guaranteed to be honored
Not a disruption budget concept; it’s a crash


Real Kubernetes scenarios
Scenario A: OOMKilled from a too-low memory limit (common)

A Java service has limits.memory: 512Mi and experiences a traffic spike; heap + off-heap + native threads grow past 512Mi.
The kernel kills the container process immediately; the pod stays on the node and gets restarted (CrashLoopBackOff if repeated).
Symptom pattern: short uptime, Last State: OOMKilled, exit 137; logs may stop mid-line.

Scenario B: Eviction from node memory pressure due to overcommit (common in shared clusters)

Multiple Burstable workloads have low requests but collectively use far more memory than requested, pushing the node below memory.available thresholds.
Kubelet evicts pods to recover, usually starting with BestEffort (e.g., a log shipper with no requests/limits), then Burstable offenders.
Symptom pattern: several pods across namespaces suddenly show Evicted, often clustered on one node; rescheduling happens elsewhere if capacity exists.

Scenario C: Eviction from ephemeral-storage pressure (often overlooked)

A pod writes verbose logs to the container filesystem; node disk (or imagefs) fills up.
Kubelet evicts one or more pods to free ephemeral storage and keep the node functional.
Symptom pattern: Evicted with messages referencing ephemeral-storage, nodefs, or imagefs; repeated if log volume continues.

Scenario D: “OOMKilled” even without a memory limit (node-level kernel OOM)

A BestEffort pod (no limits) plus other workloads push the node into true OOM.
The kernel kills processes based on OOM scoring; a container may show OOMKilled even though it had no limit.
Symptom pattern: node instability, multiple pods impacted, possible node NotReady events; root cause is overall node memory exhaustion, not a single container limit.


How to triage quickly (what to check)

If many pods on one node die with Evicted, look for node pressure (memory/disk) and overcommit (requests too low).
If one pod repeatedly dies with OOMKilled, it’s usually that workload’s memory limit (or a leak) and needs right-sizing/tuning.
Architect fix patterns:

OOMKilled: increase memory limit, reduce peak memory (heap sizing, caching), set request closer to steady-state, consider VPA recommendations.
Evictions: increase requests (reduce overcommit), add capacity/scale nodes, apply LimitRange/Quotas, review noisy-neighbor workloads and eviction thresholds, set ephemeral-storage requests/limits for heavy writers.
