when you install docker for first time in system this directory structures at /var/lib/docker.

file system:
1.aufs
2.containers
3.images
4.volumes

This is where Docker stores all its data by default.
All files related to containers are stored under the containers directory and the files related to images are stored under
the image directory. Any volumes created by the Docker containers are created under the volumes directory.

Layered Architecture
When docker builds images, it builds these in a layered architecture.
Each line of instruction in the Docker file creates a new layer in the Docker image with just the changes from the previous layer.

For better understanding the advantages of this layered architecture, Let's take a different Dockerfile, 
this is very similiar to our first application. only source code and entry point is differnet to create this application.
When image builds, docker is not going to build first three layers instead of it reuses the same three layers it built for the first application from the cache. 
Only creates the last two layers with the new sources and the new entry point.
This way, Docker builds images faster and efficiently saves disk spaces. This is also applicable, if you were to update your application code.
Docker simply reuses all the previous layers from the cache and quickly rebuild the application image by updating the latest source code.

Once the build is complete, 
you cannot modify the contents of these layers and so they are read-only and you can only modify them by initiating a new build.

When you run a container based off of this image, using the Docker run command Docker creates a container based off of these layers and creates a new writeable layer on top of the image layer. 
The writeable layer is used to store data created by the container such as log files written by the applications, any temporary files generated by the container.
 
Let's take an example of our application code. Since we bake our code into the image, the code is part of the image and as such, its read-only. 
After running a container, what if I wish to modify the source code.
Yes, I can still modify this file, but before I saved the modified file, Docker automatically creates a copy of the file in the read-write layer and I will then be modifying 
a different version of the file in the read-write layer. All future modifications will be done on this copy of the file in the read-write layer.
This is called copy-on-write mechanism.
The Image layer being a read-only just means that the files in these layers will not be modified in the image itself.
So, the image will remain the same all the time until you rebuild the image using the Docker build command. If container destroyed then all of the data that was stored in the container layer also gets deleted.
